The Oscars turn on Sunday, which seems about right after this long, strange awards trip. The Bagger feels like a nonagenarian too.
The awards race was bookended by the demise of Harvey Weinstein at its outset and the apparent implosion of his film company at the end. And it was shaped by the emergence of #MeToo, Time’s Up, black-gown politics, arm-candy activism, and a national conversation — as brief and mad as a fever dream — about whether there ought to be a President Winfrey.
The season didn’t just seem extra long; it was extra long, because the Oscars were moved to the first weekend in March to avoid conflicting with the closing ceremony of the Winter Olympics. Thanks, PyeongChang.
One big question surrounding this year’s Academy Awards is how or if the ceremony will address #MeToo, especially after the Golden Globes, which became a jubilant coming-out party for Time’s Up — the movement spearheaded by powerful Hollywood women who helped raise millions of dollars to fight sexual harassment around the country.
Signaling their support, Golden Globes attendees swathed themselves in black, sported lapel pins, and sounded off about sexist power imbalances from the red carpet and the stage. On the air, E was called out about pay inequity after its former anchor Catt Sadler quit once she learned that she was making far less than a male cohost. And during the ceremony, Natalie Portman took a blunt and satisfying dig at the all-male roster of nominated directors. How could that be topped?
As it turns out, at least in terms of the Oscars, it probably won’t be.
Women involved in Time’s Up said that although the Globes signified the initiative’s launch, they never intended it to be just an awards-season campaign or one that became associated only with red-carpet actions. Instead, a spokeswoman said the group is working behind closed doors and has since amassed millions for its legal defense fund, which after the Globes was flooded with thousands of donations of 20 dollars or less from people in some countries.
No call to wear black gowns went out in advance of the Oscars, though the movement will almost certainly be referenced before and during the ceremony, especially since vocal #MeToo supporters like Ashley Judd, Laura Dern and Nicole Kidman are scheduled presenters.
Another feature of this season: no one really knows who is going to win Best Picture. Arguably this happens a lot of the time. Inarguably, the nail-biter narrative only serves the awards hype machine. But often the people forecasting the race — so-called Oscarologists — can make only educated guesses.
The way the Academy tabulates the big winner doesn’t help. In every other category, the nominee with the most votes wins. But in the Best Picture category, voters are asked to list their top movies in preferential order. If a movie gets more than 50 percent of the first-place votes, it wins. When no movie manages that, the one with the fewest first-place votes is eliminated, and its votes are redistributed to the movies that garnered the eliminated ballots’ second-place votes. And this continues until a winner emerges.
It is all terribly confusing, but apparently the consensus favorite comes out ahead in the end. This means that end-of-season awards chatter invariably involves tortured speculation about which film would most likely be voters’ second or third favorite, and then equally tortured conclusions about which film might prevail.
In 2014, it was a tossup between Boyhood and the eventual winner Birdman.
In 2015, with lots of experts betting on The Revenant or The Big Short, the prize went to Spotlight. Last year, nearly all the forecasters declared La La Land the presumptive winner — and for two and a half minutes they were correct — before an envelope snafu was revealed, and the rightful winner Moonlight was crowned.
This year, awards watchers are unequally divided between Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri, The Favourite and The Shape of Water — which is The Bagger’s prediction — with a few forecasting a Hail Mary win for Get Out.
But all of those films have historical Oscar-voting patterns against them. The Shape of Water has 13 nominations, more than any other film, and was also named the year’s best by the Producers and Directors Guilds. Yet it was not nominated for a Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Ensemble, and no film has won Best Picture without previously landing at least the actors nomination since Braveheart in 1995. This year the Best Ensemble SAG ended up going to Three Billboards, which is significant because actors make up the Academy’s largest branch. That film, while divisive, also won the Best Drama Golden Globe and the BAFTA. But its filmmaker Martin McDonagh was not nominated for Best Director, and apart from Argo, movies that land Best Picture without also earning Best Director nominations are few and far between.